# 1 C++ Basics

## 1.1 Statements and the structure of a program
- Statements are like sentences and end in semicolon.
- Every C++ program must have a main function or it will fail to link

## 1.2 Comments
- Two styles of comments in C++:
    - // - single-line comment
    - /* */ - multiline comment
- Good comments:
    - Top of file: describe what the program/function/library/etc does
    - Within/throughout file: how the code accomplishes its goal
    - Statement level: why code is doing something. Don't say what it's doing at this level.

## 1.3 Introduction to objects and variables
- RAM is a series of addressed mailboxes where we can put data. All computers have RAM/memory.
- In C++, access memory indirectly through an object.
    - Object: region of memory with storage and some properties.
    - Named object is a variable, name of the object is identifier
    - In C++, a function is not an object (although it's different in some other programming languages)
- Variable instantiation
    - Variable is instantiated during runtime
    - Instantiation: object created and assigned a memory address
- Data types
    - Integer: number that can be written without a fractional component, like 1, 0, -1, 209, etc
    - In C++, type of variable must be known at compile time

## 1.4 Variable assignment and initialization
- Variable assignment
    - Ex: `int width; width = 5;` - the = in the second statement is copy assignment
    - = is the assignment operator
- Initialization: surprisingly complex in C++, but here is a simple view of the types:
    - `int a; // Default initialization, which in most cases, leaves a variable with an indeterminate value`
    - `int b = 5; // Copy initialization, inherited from C. Copies value on right into left-hand side. Not used much in modern C++.`
    - `int c(6); // Direct initialization. Initially introduced to allow for more efficient initialization of complex objects with class types, but not used much in modern C++ anymore, with one exception we'll cover later`
    - `int d {7}; // Brace/uniform/list initialization. Prefer this. Introduced to provide a more consistent way of initializing objects. Comes in three forms:`
        - `int width {5}; // direct brace initialization of value 5 into variable width (preferred)`
        - `int height = {6}; // copy brace initialization of value 6 into variable height`
        - `int depth {}; // value initialization (see next section)`
        - Note that brace initialization disallows narrowing conversions, so for example, this will create a compile error: `int width {4.5};`
- Value initialization
    - In most cases, initializes variable to zero or empty
- Initialize your variables upon creation

## 1.5 Introduction to iostream: cout, cin, and endl
- Use preprocessor directive `#include <iostream>`
- `std::cout << "Hello, World"!` allows us to print text to console. << is the insertion operator, and it can be chained.
- `std::endl` tells cursor to move to next line (prints a newline character); however, it can be inefficient because it also flushes the output (ensures any cached output shows up on the screen immediately). So for this reason, usually prefer `\n`, which moves cursor to next line without a flush.
- `std::cin` reads input from keyboard with the extraction operator >>. Input must be stored in a variable to be used. Ex: `std::cin >> x;`
- Disambiguation:
    - `std::cout` is used with the insertion operator `<<`, as in `std::cout << x;`. Data from variable x is being printed to the console.
    - `std::cin` is used with the extraction operator `>>`, as in `std::cin >> x;`. Data from variable x is being moved from the keyboard into variable x.
    - Note that `std::cout` and `std::cin` are always on the left.

## 1.6 Uninitialized variables and undefined behavior
C++ does not initialize variables to zero automatically. Rule of thumb: always initialize your variables.
Note: you can trick the C++ compiler into thinking you're using a variable even if you pass it to a function which doesn't use it.
Undefined behavior is the result of executing code whose behavior is not well-defined by the C++ language. Using the value of an uninitialized variable is just one example of undefined behavior.
Avoid doing things which result in undefined behavior even if it produces the result you wanted anyway. Your solution might not work on another machine (or even on your same machine on another day!)
- C++ does not initialize variables to given value automatically. Default is garbage value.
- Symptoms of undefined behavior issue:
    - Produces different results each time it's run
    - Consistently produces same incorrect result
    - Inconsistency
    - Crashing
    - Works on some compilers but not others
    - Works until you change a seemingly unrelated part of the code
- Avoid any case that causes undefined behavior, such as using an uninitialized variable

## 1.7 Keywords and naming identifiers
C++ has 92 keywords and four special identifiers: override, final, import, and module. The special identifiers are not reserved, but they do have a specific meaning when used in certain contexts.
- 92 reserved keywords
- Identifiers in C++ can only start with a letter or underscore, not a number. But otherwise, if not used as the first character, numbers are ok in identifiers. Also, identifiers are case-sensitive.
- Modern best practice for function and variable names is camelCase or separated_by_underscore, and they should start with lowercase letter (like the standard library, or main).
- Identifier names that start with a capital letter are usually reserved for user-defined types like classes, structs, and enums
- Identifier names starting with an underscore typically reserved for OS, library, or compiler use
- Make length of variable name proportional to how widely it's used
- Avoid abbreviations

## 1.8 Whitespace and basic formatting
- C++ compiler generally ignores whitespaces, except in quoted text and single-line comments
    - Quote text separated by nothing by whitespace are concatenated
- Accuracy and readability are important in formatting
- Max line length should be something like 80 characters (use a column guide)

## 1.9 Introduction to literals and operators
- Literal is a fixed value inserted directly into the code, like the `5` in `int x { 5 };`, whereas a variable can have its value changed through initialization and assignment.
- 2 + 3 = 5. 2 and 3 are the operands, + is the operator, 5 is the result value.
- The number of operands an operator takes is called its arity:
  - Unary takes one operand, like `-` when used in the context of `-5` for example
  - Binary takes two operands, like the `+` in `3 + 4`
  - Ternary takes three operands, and there is only one in C++ (the conditional operator)
  - Nullary acts on zero operands, and there is also only one in C++ (the throw operator)
    - Possible for a single operator to have more than one meaning depending on how it is used (for example, `-`)
- Operators can be chained

## 1.10 Introduction to expressions
- An expression is a combination of literals, variables, operators, and function calls that calculates a single value. Evaluation is the process of executing an expression. The value produced is the result.
- How do different entities evaluate?
  - Literals evaluate to their own value (ex: 5 evaluates to just 5)
  - Variables evaluate to the value of the variable (ex: x evaluates to the value of x)
  - Function calls evaluate to whatever value the function returns
  - Operators let us combine multiple values to produce a new value
- Note that expressions do not end in a semicolon and cannot be compiled by themselves. They are always evaluated as part of statements. An expression statement (like `x = 5;`) is a statement consisting of an expression (`x + 5`) followed by a semicolon; when the statement is executed, the expression will be evaluated. An expression statement will compile. The result of an expression statement is discarded before the next statement is executed (discarded-value expression).

## 1.11 Developing your first program
Work in steps. Don't try to do everything at once.
Optimize for maintainability, not necessarily just performance at first.

## 1.x Chapter 1 summary and quiz
See quiz program.