# 11 Arrays, Strings, and Dynamic Allocation

## 11.11 Dynamic memory allocation with new and delete

Operators new and delete allow us to dynamically allocate single variables for programs.

Dynamic memory has dynamic duration, freeing only after deallocation or program termination.

Don't perform indirection through dangling or null pointers.

When using dynamic memory, make sure to handle the case where memory allocation failed.

Memory leak: your program loses the address of some bit of dynamically allocated memory before giving it back to the OS. OS can only reclaim all the leaked memory after the program terminates. Can eat all available memory and slow or crash the machine. Ways in which memory leaks can happen include:
- pointer goes out of scope
- pointer holding address of dynamically allocated memory is assigned another value
- double-allocation

Apparently it's rare to use dynamic memory because usually you use C++ data structures.

## 11.12 Dynamically allocating arrays

Choose array length at runtime.

Use new[] and delete[]. Ex:

`int* array{ new int[length]{} };`

See 11_12_dynamic_array.cpp for example of the syntax.

Don't use delete instead of delete[] when deleting dynamically allocated memory, as it leads to undefined behavior.

Dynamic arrays very similar to fixed arrays. Dynamic array also is a pointer to first element of array, does not know length or size (similar to fixed array). Programmer cannot know the size/length of the array, and that's the main difference.

Initialization:

`int* array{ new int[length]{} };`

Can initialize dynamic array with an initializer list since C++11:

`int fixedArray[5] = { 9, 7, 5, 3, 1 }; // fixed array initialization before C++11`
`int* array { new int[5]{ 9, 7, 5, 3, 1 } }; // dynamic array initialization`

No built-in way to resize already-allocated array. If you need this capability, can use std::vector.