# 2 C++ Basics: Functions and Files

## 2.1 Introduction to functions
A function is a reusable sequence of statements designed to do a particular job.
A function call is an expression that tells the CPU to interrupt the current function and execute another function. Caller is the function initiating the function call, and the callee is the function being called.
Functions are useful because they can be repeatedly called.
Functions can functions that call functions... and so on.
Nested functions are not supported, meaning that functions cannot be defined inside of other functions.
Aside: `foo` is a metasyntactic variable, which essentially means a placeholder name.

## 2.2 Function returning values (value-returning functions)
Function must specify the type to be returned, then return the value with a return statement. When the return statement is executed, the function exits immediately. This is called return by value.
C++ has three defined status codes: 0, EXIT_SUCCESS, and EXIT_FAILURE.
C++ disallows calling the `main` function explicitly. Also define main at the bottom of the code file.
Undefined behavior if a value-returning function doesn't actually return a value.
Main will implicitly return 0 if no return statement is provided, but best practice is to return 0 anyway for consistency with other functions.
Functions can only return a single value.
Best practice is to document what the return value means, since it can be anything.
Good programming practice: DRY (don't repeat yourself)... which is the opposite of WET (write everything twice!)

## 2.3 Void functions (non-value returning functions)
Void means a function does not return a value to the caller.
Void functions do not need a return statement. They can if they want, but it's best practice to avoid adding a return statement to reduce redundancy.
Void functions can't be used in expressions that require a value (for example, when writing output to std::cout).
Void functions are called for their behavior, not their return value. Kind of like buying a car.
Returning a value fronm a void function is a compile error.
A return statement that is not the last statement in a function is called an early return. Early returns can be used in value-returning functions, too.

## 2.4 Introduction to function parameters and arguments
Function parameters are variables used in a function. They are always initialized with a value provided by the caller of the function.
An argument is a value passed from the caller to the function when a function call is made.
When a function is called, parameters of the function are created as variables, and the value of each of the arguments is copied into the matching parameter. This is called pass by value.
The argument passed to a function can be any valid expression.

## 2.5 Introduction to local scope
Function parameters and variables defined within the function body are called local variables.
Variables are created and initialized at the point of definition and destroyed at the end of the function.
Variable lifetime is the time between it's creation and destruction.
The C++ spec actually gives compilers a lot of flexibility to decide when local variables are created and destroyed for optimization reasons. This means a variable could be created earlier or destroyed later.
Variable scope determines where the identifier can be accessed within the source code.
If you have a function with x and y in scope, then call another function which takes x and y as parameters, the scopes do not overlap and the x's and y's are separate.
Best practice: Local variables inside the function body should be defined as close to their first use as reasonable.

## 2.6 Why functions are useful, and how to use them effectively
Functions are useful for organization, reusability, testing (less code to test against), extensibility, and abstraction.
When to use functions?
- Groups of statements that appears more than once in a program should be made into a function
- Code with well-defined set of inputs and outputs is good for function (even if it's only done once)
- Function should perform one and only one task
- If it does too much, refactor into multiple functions

## 2.7 Forward declarations and definitions
Functions must be declared first in the file before they are used, or the compiler will issue an error. There are two ways to fix this: reorder the function definitions, or use a forward declaration. Forward declarations don't need to specify the names of the parameters, only the types, but best practice is to keep the names so you know what the function parameters are without having to locate the function definition. (You can just copy-paste the function header and add a semicolon).
Linker error will result if you never define the function that has a forward declaration.
Forward declaractions can also be used with variables and user-defined types, but they have a different syntax.
What is the difference between a declaration and a definition?
- Definition implements (functions/types) or instantiate (variables) the identifier
  - One Definition Rule (ODR) is a well-known rule in C++:
    1. Within a given file, a function/variable/type/template can only have one definition. Violation causes compiler redefinition error. Example:
    ```
    int main()
    {
        int x;
        int x; // violation of ODR, we've already defined x
    }
    ```
    2. Within a given program, a variable or normal function can only have one definition. Violation likely causes linker to issue a redefinition error.
    3. Types/templates/inline functions/inline variables are allowed to have identical definitions in different files. Violation will cause undefined behavior.
    - Note that functions that share an identifier but have different parameters are considered to be distinct functions
- Declaration tells the compiler about the existence of an identifier and its type information. Examples:
  - `int add(int x, int y); // tells the compiler about this function, but no body!`
  - `int x; // tells the compiler about an integer variable named x`
In C++, all defintions are also declarations, but not all declarations are definitions. For example, a function declaration satisfies the compiler, but not the linker. Declarations that aren't definitions are called pure declarations. Forward declarations are pure declarations.
Note that the ODR doesn't apply to pure declarations, but it's still best to avoid having too many declarations for an identifier to avoid redundancy.

## 2.8 Programs with multiple code files
Do not #include a cpp file into another cpp file because it will cause the preprocessor to insert the contents of the #included file directly rather than treating them as separate files.

## 2.9 Naming collisions and an introduction to namespaces
C++ does not allow multiple identical identifiers to be introduced into the same program. Compiler error if the colliding identifiers are in the same file, linker error if they are in separate files in the same program. You can avoid naming collisions with namespaces. A namespace is a region that allows you to declare names inside of it for the purpose of disambiguation. Within a namespace, names must be unique.
In C++, any name not defined in a class, function, or namespace is within the global namespace, or global scope. Only declarations and definition statements can appears in the global namespace, but expression statements cannot be placed in the global namespace (for example, `int x;` is ok, but `x = 5;` is not, if they are in global scope).
`std` is the namespace for the C++ standard library.
Specify a namespace with two colons after the namespace. For example, `std::cout` says that we want to access function `cout` from namespace `std`. The two colons are called the scope resolution operator.
You can also access a namespace with the `using` directive, but it's best to avoid it because it can cause conflicts with other functions. (Avoiding those conflicts was the reason to move C++ standard library functions to their own namespace in the first place!)

## Introduction to the preprocessor
Before compilation, code goes through a phase called translation. Code file with translations applied to it is called a translation unit. One noteworthy thing that happens during translation involves the preprocessor, which is a separate program that manipulates the text in each code file. A preprocessor directive is an instruction starting with `#` and ending in a newline (NOT a semicolon). The directives tell the preprocessor to perform certain text manipulation tasks. The preprocessor does not understand C++ syntax. Some of the most common preprocessor directives:
- `#include`: replaces the directive with the contents of the included file. This directive is almost exclusively used to include header files.
- `#define`: for object-like macros and function-like macros. Function-like macros are seen as dangerous, and almost anything they can do can be done by a normal function. Object-like macros can be defined as `#define identifier` or `#define identifier substitution_text`. Generally, it's better to avoid these kinds of macros, as there are better ways to do this kind of thing.
- `#ifdef`, `#ifndef`, and `#endif`: works with the object-like macro `#define identifier`, checks whether an identifier has been defined, and if so, the code between `#ifdef`/`#ifndef` and `#endif` is compiled. The syntax `#if defined(IDENTIFIER)` is also allowed. `#if 0` and `#endif` can be used together to comment out code, which can be useful if you have another multiline comment because multiline comments are non-nestable.
Note that object-like macros don't affect other preprocessor directives, only normal code.
Directives are resolved before compilation, from top to bottom, on a file-by-file basis. So for general readability, it's best to have `#define` identifiers outside of functions.
Directives are only valid from the point of definition to the end of the file in which they are defined.

## 2.11 Header Files
Header files allow you to put all your forward declarations in one place and import them when you need them.
Best practice: header files should generally not contain function and variable definitions to avoid violating the one definition rule. Exception is made for symbolic constants.
Header files only have two parts: a header guard and the content.
It's best practice for code files to `#include` their paired header file, if one exists. This allows the compiler to catch certain kinds of errors at compile time instead of link time, for example, if the return type of a function does not match between the header file and the cpp file.
Angled brackets (like in `#include <iostream>`) tell the preprocessor that this is a header file we didn't write ourselves, so it will search for the header only in the directories specified by the include directories and not through your own files. Double quotes (like in `#include "add.h"`) tells the preprocessor that this is a header file we wrote, so it will first serach for the header file in the current directory. If it can't find the matching header there, it'll then search the include directories.
In the standard library, iostream.h is a different header file than iostream, which is due to historical reasons (the committee needed a way to move standard library functions to their own namespace while not breaking existing programs). Best practice is to use the version without the .h extension if it exists. User-defined headers should still use a .h extension.
To include header files from other directories, it's best to put all the header files in one place and not bake the path to the file in an include statement (like `#include ../headers/someHeader.h`). It's more maintainable if you decide to change the location of files.
Headers may include other headers. Transitive includes are the additional header files that are included implicitly rather than explicitly. Best practice is to explicitly include all the header files it needs to compile, and not to rely on headers included transitively from other headers.
Best practice: to maximize the chance that missing includes will be flagged by the compiler, order your includes as follows:
1. The paired header file
2. Other headers from your project
3. 3rd party library headers
4. Standard library headers
Sort the headers for each grouping alphabetically.
This way, if one of your user-defined headers is missing an #include for a 3rd party library or standard library header, it's more likely to cause a compile error so you can fix it.
Header file best practices:
1. Always include header guards
2. Don't define variables and functions in header files (exception: global constants, and likely templated functions)
3. Name header and related file the same thing (add.h, add.cpp)
4. Make headers have a specific job and as independent as possible
5. Be mindful of which headers you need to explicitly include for the functionality you're using in your code files
6. Every header should compile on its own
7. Only #include what you need
8. Don't #include .cpp files.

## 2.12 Header guards
Header guards get around the issue where you include a definition twice. Recall that the preprocessor macros are only valid for one file, and that the entire contents of the headers are included in place of every #include statement. Header guards are like this:
```
#ifndef SOME_UNIQUE_NAME
#define SOME_UNIQUE_NAME
// declarations...
#endif
```
All headers should have header guards. Make sure the name is unique globally in your program.
One unexpected problem is that header guards don't prevent the contents of a header from being included once in multiple files. That means that if you have definitions in a header file, you can end up violating the one-definition rule. Thus, it's best practice to avoid definitions in header files.
An alternative to header guards on many modern compilers is `#pragma once`, which serves the same purpose and is shorter and less error-prone (you can use the same thing everywhere rather than coming up with a bunch of unique names). However, it's not an official part of the C++ language, so the tutorial recommends favoring header guards over `#pragma once` for maximum portability.

## 2.13 How to design your first programs
1. Define the goal
2. Define requirements
3. Define tools, targets, and backup plan
4. Break hard problems down into easy problems
5. Figure out the sequence of events
Implementation steps:
1. Outline the main function
2. Implement each function
3. Final testing
Advice when writing programs:
- Keep your programs simple at first
- Add features over time
- Focus on one area at a time
- Test each piece of code as you go
- Don't invest in perfecting early code

## 2.x Chapter 2 summary and quiz
