# 3 Debugging C++ Programs

## 3.1 Syntax and semantic errors
Syntax errors occur when a statement is not valid according to C++ language grammar. Example: `std::cout < Hi there; << x;` has an invalid operator (<) and an extraneous semicolon. If x was undeclared, that's also a syntax error.
Semantic errors occur when a statement is syntactically valid, but doesn't do what the programmer intended. Example: dividing by zero, or using an uninitialized variable.
Compilers have gotten better at detecting semantic errors, but aren't able to catch all these problems because they are designed to enforce grammar, not intent.

## 3.2 The debugging process
General approach:
1. Find the root cause (usually a line of code)
2. Ensure you understand why the issue is occurring
3. Determine how to fix it
4. Repair
5. Retest

## 3.3 A strategy for debugging
Finding the error is usually the most difficult part of debugging. Here are some ways to find problems:
1. Code inspection. Might be easy in small programs or isolated sections of code, but unweildy in larger programs.
2. Running the program. Figure out how to reproduce the problem, run the program and gather information to narrow down the problem, and repeat until you find the problem.
Document reproduction steps if a problem is hard to reproduce (what system is it failing on, for example).
To narrow down the problem, think of the hi-lo game, where you use the information you collect to home in on the issue. Finding a section of your code where you don't yet see the problem is like receiving a "too low" result, and finding a section fo the code where you do see it is like a "too high" result.

## 3.4 Basic debugging tactics
1. Comment out your code
2. Validate your code flow (ex: print the function name at the top for each function you call). When printing information for debugging purposes, use std::cerr instead of std::cout because std::cout might be buffered, which might introduce pauses from when you called it to when it prints. std::cerr is unbuffered and makes it clear that this is for an error case.
3. Printing values. Tip: dbg-macro is a third-party library that can make debugging using print statements easier. However, it's not great because it clutters your code and output, requires modifications to code which can cause more bugs, and must be removed after you're done, which makes them non-reusable.

## 3.5 More debugging tactics
Some techniques to mitigate the issues listed above with printing values for debug:
- Conditionalize your debugging code (can use #ifdef/#endif). Downside is that it creates more code clutter.
- Use a logger to write output to a log file. Example third party library for this is [plog](https://github.com/SergiusTheBest/plog). Conditional compilation directives not required, as most loggers contain methods to reduce or eliminate writing output to the log.

## 3.6 Using an integrated debugger: Stepping
Debuggers allow us to stop the program to inspect the state and step though lines of code while watching program values change.
- Step into: execute the next statement in the normal execution path of the program, then pause execution of the program so we can examine the program's state using the debugger. If the statement being executed contains a function call, step into will cause the program to jump to the top of the function being called, where it will pause.
- Step over: execute the next statement in the normal execution path of the program, but doesn't step into functions.
- Step out: execute all remaining code in the function currently being executed, then return control to you when the function has returned
- Step back: not generally available on all debuggers because it's complex to implement, but allows you to go back if you overstep or want to re-examine a step that just executed.

# 3.7 Using an integrated debugger: Running and breakpoints
- Run to cursor: right click on a line of code and select "run to cursor" to run until that line of code. If that line never gets executed, the debugger runs your program until completion.
- Continue: continues running the program as per normal until the program terminates or it hits a breakpoint
- Start: performs the same action as continue, but starts from the beginning of the program and can only be invoked when not already in a debug session
- Breakpoint: a special marker that tells the debugger to stop execution of the program at the breakpoint when running in debug mode. Similar to "run to cursor", but more reusable, especially when you have a piece of code executing in a loop and you want to stop on it each time it executes.
- Set next statement: change the point of execution to some other statement (sometimes informatlly called jumping). Note, it's not supported in the Visual Studio Code debugger. Can be useful if you want to skip over a section of code. It can also let you rerun a function that just executed. The downside is that it can be confusing because your program can produce different values than it would otherwise with all the jumping around. Also, you should not use set next statement to change the point of execution to a different function, because that will result in undefined behavior and likely a crash.

## 3.8 Using an integrated debugger: Watching variables
Watching variables lets you inspect the value of a variable while the program is executing in debug mode. Can set a watch on a variable and see how its value changes throughout code execution.
Locals let you quickly watch the value of all local variables in scope.

## 3.9 Using an integrated debugger: The call stack
The call stack is a list of all the active functions that have been called to get to the current point of execution. Includes an entry for each function called and which line of code will be returned to when the function returns. Whenever a new function is called, that function is added to the top of the call stack. When the current function returns to the caller, it's removed from the top of the call stack, and control returns to the function just below it.

## 3.10 Finding issues before they become problems
Don't make errors by following best practices and understanding the common pitfalls of the language. Add lots of comments, keep programs simple and functions short, use the standard library, and don't program when tired.
Refactor your code. Keep functions to less than 5 or 10 lines. Make behavioral or structural changes one at a time (not simultaneously) and retest each time.
Practice defensive programming by anticipating all the ways the software could be misused by either end users or other developers using the code.
Find errors quickly by testing and adding constraints (for example, assert and static_assert). Unit testing tests small units of source code to determine whether they are correct. There are many 3rd party unit testing frameworks that can be used.
Static analysis tools/linters analyze your code to look for specific semantic issues. (Static means they analyze the source code). The compiler is a static analysis tool. VS 2019 comes with a built-in static analysis tool, which can be accessed with Build > Run Code Analysis on Solution.

## 3.x Chapter 3 summary and quiz
See quiz programs