# 4 Fundamental Data Types

## 4.1 Introduction to fundamental data types
A binary digit, or a bit, is the smallest unit of memory which can hold a 0 or 1. Memory is organized into sequential units called memory addresses. Each memory address holds 1 byte of data. A byte is a group of bits that are operated on as a unit. The modern standard is that a byte is composed of 8 sequential bits. (Some older or non-standard machines might have bytes of a different size, but it's not something that you typically have to worry about with modern programming).
Data types tell the compiler how to interpret the contents of memory in some meaningful way.
Fundamental data types are the types for which C++ comes with built-in support.
Note: integral means "like an integer" and is often used as part of the term `integral type`, which includes all the Boolean, characters, enumerated, and integer types. They are so named because they're stored in memory as integers, even though their behaviors might vary. This is distinct from the term `integer`, which is a specific data type that holds non-fractional numbers, such as whole numbers, 0, and negative whole numbers.
Strings are not a fundamental type in C++, but rather a compound type.

## 4.2 Void
Void means no type. Usually see in the context of a function that does not have a return type.

## 4.3 Object sizes and the sizeof operator
An object with n bits can hold 2^n unique values.
C++ only guarantees that each fundamental data type will have a minimum size. However, the actual size of the variables may be different on your machine. Don't assume that variables are larger than the specified minimum size. Objects of fundamental data types are generally extremely fast.
`sizeof` is a unary operator that takes a type or variable and returns its size in bytes.
Types that use less memory are not necessarily faster than types that use more memory. For example, CPUs are often optimized to process data of a certain size most quickly.

## 4.4 Signed integers
Four different fundamental integer types: short int, int, long int, long long int.
Integers are signed by default. Prefer `short s;` over `short int s;` because it makes it harder to make a mistake if you accidentally miss the `short` keyword (doesn't blend in with the `int` type).
Range of a signed number is [-2^(n-1), 2^(n-1) - 1].
Integer overflow happens when we try to store a value that is outside the range of the type. Signed integer overflow leads to undefined behavior. Generally results in a loss of information.
In C++, division with two integers always produces an integer result. Any fractional portion is dropped, not rounded.

## 4.5 Unsigned integers, and why to avoid them
Unsigned integers can only hold non-negative whole numbers. The range for unsigned integers is [0, 2^n - 1]. Unsigned integers are good for systems with little memory.
Unsigned integer overflow results in wraparound behavior.
Don't use unsigned with signed integers.

## 4.6 Fixed-width integers and size_t
C99 defines fixed-width integers which are defined in the stdint.h header as part of the standard library. However, they are not guaranteed to be defined on all architectures and might be slower than a wider type; it's hard to know performance impact without measuring.
Fast and least integers are guaranteed to be defined: `std::int_least8_t` is the smallest signed integer type that's at least 8 bits, and `std::uint_fast16_t` is the fastest unsigned integer type that's at least 16 bits. But not a lot of programmers use these, and because architectures are different, it's possible for the program to exhibit different behavior on different architectures.
Warning: the 8-bit fixed-width integer types are often treated like chars instead of integer values, and this may vary per system. Prefer the 16-bit fixed integral types for most cases. This was due to an oversight in the C++ specification.
Best practices:
- Use int when the size of the integer doesn't matter, like when the number will always git in the range of a 2-byte signed integer (~-32k to 32k)
- Prefer std::int#_t when storing a quantity that needs a guaranteed range
- Prefer std::uint#_t when doing bit manipulation or where well-defined wraparound behavior is required
Avoid:
- Unsigned types for holding quantities
- 8b fixed-width integer types
- fast and least fixed-width types
- Compiler-specific fixed-width integers
`sizeof()` returns a value of the type std::size_t, which is defined as an unsigned integral type and is typically used to represetn the size/length of objects.
`std::size_t` varies in size, and in most systems will be equivalent to the address-width of the application. It's defined to be big enough to hold the size of the largest object creatable in your system in bytes. Any object with a size in bytes larger than the largest integral value size_t can hold is considered ill-formed and will cause a compiler error, as the sizeof operator would not be able to return the size without wrapping around. Some compilers limit the largest creatable object to half the maximum value of `std::size_t`. But in practice, the largest creatable object might be smaller than this amount, depending on how much contiguous memory your computer has available for allocation.

## 4.7 Introduction to scientific notation
Scientific notation: significand x 10^exponent
Digits before the x10^ or e are significant digits, which define the number's precision
Zeros after whole numbers are trimmed, unless there is also a decimal point

## 4.8 Floating point numbers
Three different floating-point types: float, double, and long double. Follows IEEE 754 binary format: float is 4 bytes, double is 8, long double can be equivalent to a double (8), 80b (often padded to 12 bytes), or 16 bytes. Floating point types are always signed. Always include at least one decimal place to h elp the compiler understand that the number is floating-point.
`std::cout` will truncate to 6 digits, and would print `5.0` as `5`. Override the default precision using an `output manipulator` function named `std::setprecision()`, like this: `std::cout << std::setprecision(16); std::cout << 3.33333333333333333333333f << '\n'`, which will output 3.333333253860474 (a float will have less precision than a double). Note that the number is not precise to 16 digits. Precision issues impact any number with too many significant digits, not just fractional numbers. Best practice: favor double over float unless space is at a premium, as the lack of precision in a float will often lead to inaccuracies.
Rounding errors compound. Be wary of using floating-point numbers for comparisons, financial, or currency data.
Inf represents infinity and can be positive or negative. NaN stands for Not a Number, of which there are several different kinds. Both are only available if the compiler uses IEEE 754 for floating-point numbers, otherwise undefined behavior could result. If you see IND, it stands for indeterminate. Best practice: avoid division by 0 altogether, even if your compiler supports it.

## 4.9 Boolean values
Boolean variables take on the values `true` (1) or `false` (0). They are stored as integers and are considered an integral type. Printing a boolean will print a number, unless you use `std::boolalpha` as in `std::cout << std::boolalpha;`, which will then print as true/false. Revert to printing numbers with `std::noboolalpha`.
Copy initialization allows implicit conversion from int to bool, but not uniform initialization.
`std::cin` only accepts 0 and 1 as inputs for boolean variables, not true or false, which will cause `std::cin` to silently fail. However, you can use `std::cin >> std::boolalpha;` to allow the user to enter true or false for boolean values (although this does not allow for 0 and 1 to then be treated as booleans).

## 4.10 Introduction to if statements
If statements can be chained to handle many conditions, and execute if the result of the condition is true. Can be used with `else` and `if else` to handle the condition when the statement is not true and to test other conditions.

## 4.11 Chars
Char data type holds a single character, which can be a single letter, number, symbol, or whitespace.
ASCII stands for American Standard Code for Information Interchange, and defines a way to represent Engligh characters and a few other symbols as numbers between 0 and 127 (ASCII code). Codes 32-127 are printable characters. You can initialize chars with character literals like `'a'` (preferred) or ASCII integers like `97` (not preferred).
You can only read in a single char at a time with std::cin and chars, so if you want more than one char at a time, use a string instead. A string is a collection of sequential characters.
Char is defined in C++ to always be 1 byte in size. Can be signed or unsigned, but usually signed. Unsigned range is 0-255, signed range is -128-127.
Escape sequence has special meaning, starts with a backslash `\`, then is followed by a letter, number, or symbol. Example: `'\t'` is the escape sequence for a horizontal tab.
Put standalone chars in single quotes. Text between double quotes is treated as a string.
Avoid multicharacter literals (like `'56'`), as they have a compiler implementation-defined value and are not part of the C++ standard.
There are some other char types. `wchar_t` should be avoided except when interfacing with the Windows API. Size is implementation-defined and not reliable, and it's largely deprecated.
Unicode maps over 144,000 integers to characters in many different languages and needs 32 bits to represent a character (UTF-32). Unicode characters can also be encoded using multiple 16-bit or 8-bit characters (UTF-16 and UTF-8). `char16_t` and `char32_t` were added to C++11 to provide explicit support for 16-bit and 32-bit Unicode characters. `char8_t` was added in C++20. So you don't need to use any of these character types unless you are making your program Unicode compatible.

## 4.12 Introduction to type conversion and static_cast
Implicit type conversion is when the compiler does type conversion on our behalf without us explicitly asking. For example, if you pass an integer into a function which accepts a double, the integer will be converted to a double value then copied into the parameter. Type conversion produces a new value of the target type from a value of a different type. Sometimes implicit type conversion is not sufficient and we get a warning - for example, passing a double to a function which accepts an int. Note that brace initialization will cause the compiler to throw an error if implicit type conversion results in possible data loss.
Explicit type conversion allows the programmer to tell the compiler to convert a value from one type to another type, and that the programmer takes responsibility for the result of the conversion, including any data loss. In most cases, use the `static_cast` operator like this: `static_cast<new_type>(expression)`. The argument to static_cast evaluates as an expression, meaning that when we pass in a variable (like a char we're converting to an int), the variable is evaluated to produce its value, and that value is then converted to the new type. The original variable is not itself changed, even after we've cast its value.
You can also cast between unsigned and signed, but static_cast doesn't do any range checking, so if you cast a value to a type whose range doesn't include that value, undefined behavior will result.
Note also that std::int8_t and std::uint8_t will likely behave like chars instead of integers. This might be a problem if you're trying to print the value of an int8_t or uint8_t after you've assigned it some integer value. You can use static_cast to an int to get the integer to print.

## 4.13 Const variables and symbolic constants
A constant is a variable that may not be changed. Two types of constants in C++: const variables and literals. Here, we talk about const variables.
A variable whose value cannot be changed is called a constant variable. This can be useful for cases where we have a value we don't want to change, like the gravity of Earth: 9.8 m/s^2. To make a variable a constant, place the `const` keyword in the variable's declaration either before of after the variable type: `const double gravity {9.8};`. (Preferred to have const before type to follow standard English language convention where modifiers come before the object being modified).
Const variables must be initialized when you define them. That value cannot be changed via assignment. Const variables can be initialized from other variables, including non-const ones.
Function parameters can be made const with the `const` keyword. This enlists the compiler's help to make sure the parameter's value is not changed inside the function. Don't need to use `const` when passing by value because it clutters the code without adding value. Important to use const correctly when passing by reference and address.
The return value of a function can also be made const by putting the `const` keyword before the return type, like this: `const int getValue() { ... }`. However, best to avoid this because the returned value is a copy anyway, and this can impede certain compiler optimizations.
A symbolic constant is a name that is given to a constant value. Constant variables are one type of symbolic constant. Object-like macros with substitution text are also symbolic constants. For symbolic constants, prefer constant variables to object-like macros because:
1. macros are resolved by the preprocessor before compilation, so makes it harder to debug
2. macros can have naming conflicts with normal code
3. macros don't follow normal scoping rules, which can cause conflicts with code written in another unrelated part of the program
Best practice to define a symbolic constant in a central location and use them whenever needed.

## 4.14 Compile-time constants, constant expressions, and constexpr
A constant expression is an expression that can be evaluated by the compiler at compile-time. All values in the expression must be known at compile-time, and all the operators and functions called must support compile-time evaluation. Makes compilation time longer, but runtime faster and using less memory, since expressions only need to be evaluated once.
Compile-time constants is a constnat whose value is known at compile-time, like `1` or `"Hello, world!"`. Compile-time const variables are compile-time constants if the initializer is a constant expression.
Runtime constants are constants whose initialization values aren't known until runtime.
It can be hard to tell whether a variable labeled `const` is a runtime or compile-time const, so you can use the `constexpr` keyword so the compiler ensures we have a compile-time const where we expect one. A `constexpr` variable can only be a compile-time constant and will produce an error if it's not a constant expression. Best practice: any variable that should not be modifiable after initialization and whose initializer is known at compile-time should be declared as `constexpr`. Any variable that should not be modifiable after initialization and whose initializer is NOT known at compile-time should be declared as `const`. Function parameters cannot be `constexpr`.
Compilers can often optimize constant subexpressions, such as replacing `3+4` in the following runtime expression with a `7`: `std::cout << 3 + 4 << '\n';`. This optimization process is called "constant folding". Making variables constexpr ensures those variables have values known at compile-time to allow the compiler to make optimizations such as this, even when used in non-const expressions.

## 4.15 Literals
Literals (or literal constants) are unnamed values inserted directly into the code, like:
`return 5; // 5 is an integer literal`
`bool myNameIsAlex {true}; // true is a boolean literal`
`std::cout << 3.4; // 3.4 is a double literal`
All literals have a type deduced from the literal's value. If the default is not what you want, you can use a suffix to change the type, like 5u, which will change 5 to an unsigned int. Suffixes are not case-sensitive. Prefer literal suffix L over l because the latter looks like the number 1.
Floating point literals default to double, so if you want to use a float, must use the f suffix.
Magic numbers are literals with unclear meaning that might need to be changed later. Avoid magic numbers in your code. Use symbolic constants instead, so you only need to update a value in one place to make a change to the value across the entire program.

## 4.16 Numeral systems (decimal, binary, hexadecimal, and octal)
Four main numeral systems available in C++: decimal (base 10), binary (base 2), hexadecimal (base 16), and octal (base 8).
Octal literal: prefix literal with a zero (0). Recommend avoiding octal because it's hardly ever used.
Hexadecimal literal: prefix literal with a 0x. Often used to represent memory addresses or raw data in memory, whose type isn't known.
In C++14, you can use binary literals with the 0b prefix. Can use the quotation mark (') as a digit separator, but not before the first digit of the value.
Values print in decimal by default. Change output format with `std::dec`, `std::oct`, and `std::hex` I/O manipulators. To output in binary, use `std::bitset` type (different usage than the others).

## 4.17 Introduction to std::string
