# 5 Operators

## 5.1 Operator precedence and associativity
C++ has 17 precedence levels. Some precedence levels are left-to-right, others are right-to-left associativity (which means, given adjacent operators in the same precedence level, what is the order in which they resolve?). Consult a chart if uncertain, or just default to using parentheses for clarity. Expressions with a single assignment operator do not need to have the right operand of the assignment wrapped in parentheses.
Assume that parts of an expression could evaluate in any order, outside of the operator precedence and associativity rules.

## 5.2 Arithmetic operators
2 unary arithmetic operators (+,-) and 5 binary (+,-,*,/,%), 6 arithmetic assignment (=,+=,-=,*=,/=,%=).

## 5.3 Modulus and Exponentiation
Modulus operator % will find the remainder only with integer operands. Use to test if a number is evenly divisible by another number. % also works with negative numbers and always returns results with the sign of x in x%y.
C++ does not have an exponentiation operator; instead #include the cmath header and use the    `std::pow()` function. You have to write your own function if you want to do integer exponentiation, but it will often overflow the integral type, which is why it wasn't included in the standard library in the first place.

## 5.4 Increment/decrement operators, and side effects
Prefix version is more efficient/performant, i.e. ++x and not x++.
`int x{5}; int y = ++x; // x is incremented to 6, x is evaluated to 6, 6 is assigned to y`
`int x{5}; int y = x++; // x is incremented to 6, copy of original x is evaluated to 5, 5 is assigned to y`
Note that increment/decrement operators change the value of the variable, not just the value of a copy of the variable.
C++ standard (intentionally) does not define the order in which function arguments are evaluated. Ex: `x + ++x` could evaluate differently depending on the compiler. Avoid these problems by ensuring that any variable with a side effect is used no more than once in a given statement.

## 5.5 Comma and conditional operators
The comma operator allows you to evaluate multiple expressions wherever a single expression is allowed. It evaluates the left operand, then the right operand, then returns the result of the right operand. Avoid using the comma operator, except within for loops. It has the lowest precedence of all the operators, even lower than assignment, so that z = (a, b); evaluates differently than z = a, b; (which really is (z = a), b;). Also, in almost every case, a statement written using the comma operator would be better written as separate statements. It is fine to use the comma as a separator, such as in function arguments.
The ternary/conditional/"arithmetic if" operator (?:) takes 3 operands and provides a shorthand for doing a particular type of if/else statement. It is useful to compact code without losing readability. Always parenthesize the conditional part of the conditional operator, and if using it as part of a larger expression, parenthesize the whole thing. The conditional operator evaluates as an expression rather than a statement, so you can use it in some places where if/else cannot be used; for example `constexpr int classSize { inBigClassroom ? 30 : 20 };`.
The type of both expressions in a conditional statement must match, or the both expressions must be converticle to a common type.
Only use the conditional operator for simple conditionals where you use the result and where it enhances readability.

## 5.6 Relational operators and floating point comparisons
6 relational operators: >, <, >=, <=, ==, !=.
Floating point comparisons with >, <, >=, and <= can be ok depending on the context, but because of rounding errors, you might get unexpected results if the values being compared are close. However, you should avoid using == and != to compare floating point values if there is any chance those values have been calculated. The exception is if a function returns a low-precision literal, such as 0.0 or 1.0, and you want to compare against it. Or, if you have a const or constexpre that we can guarantee is a literal.
How do you do floating point equality comparison, then? The best way is to write a function to see if the operands are within some scaled epsilon of each other. See code examples.

## 5.7 Logical operators
3 logical operators: !, &&, ||
Logical not (!) has a high level of precedence.
Short circuit evaluation may cause Logical OR and Logical AND to not evaluate one operand, so avoid using expressions with side effects in conjunction with these operators. C++ standard does explicitly state that in logical OR and AND operators, the left operand must evaluate first (so it's an exception to the general rule). Only the built-in versions of these operators perform short-circuit evaluation; if you overload the operators, the overloaded operators will not perform short circuit evaluation.
&& has higher precedence than ||, so explicitly parenthesize each operation to ensure they evaluate how you intended.
De Morgan's Law:
!(x && y) is equivalent to !x || !y
!(x || y) is equivalent to !x && !y
So when you distribute logical NOT, you also need to flip logical AND to logical OR, and vice-versa.
You can prove this with a truth table.
C++ does not have a logical XOR operator. Mimic logical XOR using the inequality operator !=. Only works with booleans, so static_cast to bool if you want to work with non-boolean operators that are of a type that can be converted to bool.
C++ supports alternate keyword names for logical operators: && is `and`, || is `or`, and ! is `not`. Prefer symbolic names, as that's more often found in existing code.

## 5.x Chapter 5 summary and quiz
Always use parentheses to disambiguate operator precedence if there is any question or opportunity for confusion.
